{
  "componentName": "Address lookup",
  "componentOverview": "The address lookup component allows users to quickly find and select an address by typing part of the address or postcode into a search field. As the user types, a list of matching addresses appears in a dropdown, from which the correct option can be chosen. This approach reduces the need for users to enter full address details manually and helps avoid errors from incomplete or illegible entries.\r\n\r\nThe component also includes a fallback option to “Enter address manually,” ensuring users can provide an address if it is not available in the lookup results or if they prefer to enter it directly. This dual approach balances efficiency with inclusivity.\r\n\r\nThe design is based on established patterns such as the Royal Mail’s address lookup service. Visual examples show the step-by-step interaction: entering partial information, selecting a suggested address, and displaying the completed address in the field.\r\n\r\nNo accessibility testing has yet been carried out on the component, and the API provider for the address lookup has not been chosen. These will be explored before moving into private beta.",
  "howIsTheComponentUsed": "The component has been used in the manage applications project during its alpha phase. It is applied when staff enter addresses of PIN contacts into the digital system, replacing the previous paper-based method. Staff input application details into a DPS interface, and the address lookup makes this process faster and less error-prone.\r\n\r\nThe feature has been well received because staff often deal with applications where prisoners do not know a full address, or the address is handwritten and difficult to read. The lookup helps staff identify and complete addresses more reliably, reducing mistakes caused by missing or illegible details.\r\n\r\nThis use demonstrates how the component can support digitisation of manual, paper-based services. It is especially useful where speed, accuracy, and reliability of address entry are important. The manual entry option remains available for flexibility when an address cannot be found through the lookup service."
}